1. [Introduction to Linux Privilege Escalation](#Introduction%20to%20Linux%20Privilege%20Escalation)
	1. [Enumeration](#Enumeration)
		1. [List Current Processes](#List%20Current%20Processes)
		1. [List Current Processes](#List%20Current%20Processes)
		1. [Home Directory Contents](#Home%20Directory%20Contents)
		1. [User\'s Home Directory Contents](#User%5C's%20Home%20Directory%20Contents)
		1. [SSH Directory Contents](#SSH%20Directory%20Contents)
		1. [Bash History](#Bash%20History)
		1. [Sudo - List User\'s Privileges](#Sudo%20-%20List%20User%5C's%20Privileges)
		1. [Passwd](#Passwd)
		1. [Cron Jobs](#Cron%20Jobs)
		1. [File Systems & Additional Drives](#File%20Systems%20&%20Additional%20Drives)
		1. [Find Writable Directories](#Find%20Writable%20Directories)
		1. [Find Writable Files](#Find%20Writable%20Files)
	1. [Moving on](#Moving%20on)
1. [Environment Enumeration](#Environment%20Enumeration)
	1. [Gaining Situational Awareness](#Gaining%20Situational%20Awareness)
		1. [Existing Users](#Existing%20Users)
		1. [Existing Groups](#Existing%20Groups)
		1. [Mounted File Systems](#Mounted%20File%20Systems)
		1. [Unmounted File Systems](#Unmounted%20File%20Systems)
		1. [All Hidden Files](#All%20Hidden%20Files)
		1. [All Hidden Directories](#All%20Hidden%20Directories)
		1. [Temporary Files](#Temporary%20Files)
	1. [Moving On](#Moving%20On)
1. [{#section .text-center style="margin-top: 270px;"}](#%7B#section%20.text-center%20style=%22margin-top:%20270px;%22%7D)
1. [{#section-1 .text-center style="margin-top: 270px;"}](#%7B#section-1%20.text-center%20style=%22margin-top:%20270px;%22%7D)
		1. [Questions {#questions .card-title .mt-0 .font-size-medium}](#Questions%20%7B#questions%20.card-title%20.mt-0%20.font-size-medium%7D)
1. [Linux Services & Internals Enumeration](#Linux%20Services%20&%20Internals%20Enumeration)
	1. [Internals](#Internals)
		1. [Network Interfaces](#Network%20Interfaces)
		1. [Hosts](#Hosts)
		1. [User\'s Last Login](#User%5C's%20Last%20Login)
		1. [Logged In Users](#Logged%20In%20Users)
		1. [Command History](#Command%20History)
		1. [Finding History Files](#Finding%20History%20Files)
		1. [Cron](#Cron)
		1. [Proc](#Proc)
	1. [Services](#Services)
		1. [Installed Packages](#Installed%20Packages)
		1. [Sudo Version](#Sudo%20Version)
		1. [Binaries](#Binaries)
		1. [GTFObins](#GTFObins)
		1. [Trace System Calls](#Trace%20System%20Calls)
		1. [Configuration Files](#Configuration%20Files)
		1. [Scripts](#Scripts)
		1. [Running Services by User](#Running%20Services%20by%20User)
1. [{#section-2 .text-center style="margin-top: 270px;"}](#%7B#section-2%20.text-center%20style=%22margin-top:%20270px;%22%7D)
1. [{#section-3 .text-center style="margin-top: 270px;"}](#%7B#section-3%20.text-center%20style=%22margin-top:%20270px;%22%7D)
		1. [Questions {#questions-1 .card-title .mt-0 .font-size-medium}](#Questions%20%7B#questions-1%20.card-title%20.mt-0%20.font-size-medium%7D)


# Introduction to Linux Privilege Escalation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The root account on Linux systems provides full administrative level
access to the operating system. During an assessment, you may gain a
low-privileged shell on a Linux host and need to perform privilege
escalation to the root account. Fully compromising the host would allow
us to capture traffic and access sensitive files, which may be used to
further access within the environment. Additionally, if the Linux
machine is domain joined, we can gain the NTLM hash and begin
enumerating and attacking Active Directory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Enumeration

Enumeration is the key to privilege escalation. Several helper scripts
(such as [LinEnum](https://github.com/rebootuser/LinEnum)) exist to
assist with enumeration. Still, it is also important to understand what
pieces of information to look for and to be able to perform your
enumeration manually. When you gain initial shell access to the host, it
is important to check several key details.

`OS Version`: Knowing the distribution (Ubuntu, Debian, FreeBSD, Fedora,
SUSE, Red Hat, CentOS, etc.) will give you an idea of the types of tools
that may be available. This would also identify the operating system
version, for which there may be public exploits available.

`Kernel Version`: As with the OS version, there may be public exploits
that target a vulnerability in a specific kernel version. Kernel
exploits can cause system instability or even a complete crash. Be
careful running these against any production system, and make sure you
fully understand the exploit and possible ramifications before running
one.

`Running Services`: Knowing what services are running on the host is
important, especially those running as root. A misconfigured or
vulnerable service running as root can be an easy win for privilege
escalation. Flaws have been discovered in many common services such as
Nagios, Exim, Samba, ProFTPd, etc. Public exploit PoCs exist for many of
them, such as CVE-2016-9566, a local privilege escalation flaw in Nagios
Core \< 4.2.4.

### List Current Processes

        [!bash!]$ ps aux | grep root

    root         1  1.3  0.1  37656  5664 ?        Ss   23:26   0:01 /sbin/init
    root         2  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        S    23:26   0:00 [kthreadd]
    root         3  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        S    23:26   0:00 [ksoftirqd/0]
    root         4  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        S    23:26   0:00 [kworker/0:0]
    root         5  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        S<   23:26   0:00 [kworker/0:0H]
    root         6  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        S    23:26   0:00 [kworker/u8:0]
    root         7  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        S    23:26   0:00 [rcu_sched]
    root         8  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        S    23:26   0:00 [rcu_bh]
    root         9  0.0  0.0      0     0 ?        S    23:26   0:00 [migration/0]



      

`Installed Packages and Versions`: Like running services, it is
important to check for any out-of-date or vulnerable packages that may
be easily leveraged for privilege escalation. An example is Screen,
which is a common terminal multiplexer (similar to tmux). It allows you
to start a session and open many windows or virtual terminals instead of
opening multiple terminal sessions. Screen version 4.05.00 suffers from
a privilege escalation vulnerability that can be easily leveraged to
escalate privileges.

`Logged in Users`: Knowing which other users are logged into the system
and what they are doing can give greater into possible local lateral
movement and privilege escalation paths.

### List Current Processes

        [!bash!]$ ps au

    USER            PID %CPU %MEM    VSZ   RSS TTY      STAT START   TIME COMMAND
    root            1256  0.0  0.1  65832  3364 tty1     Ss   23:26   0:00 /bin/login --
    cliff.moore     1322  0.0  0.1  22600  5160 tty1     S    23:26   0:00 -bash
    shared          1367  0.0  0.1  22568  5116 pts/0    Ss   23:27   0:00 -bash
    root            1384  0.0  0.1  52700  3812 tty1     S    23:29   0:00 sudo su
    root            1385  0.0  0.1  52284  3448 tty1     S    23:29   0:00 su
    root            1386  0.0  0.1  21224  3764 tty1     S+   23:29   0:00 bash
    shared          1397  0.0  0.1  37364  3428 pts/0    R+   23:30   0:00 ps au

      

`User Home Directories`: Are other user\'s home directories accessible?
User home folders may also contain SSH keys that can be used to access
other systems or scripts and configuration files containing credentials.
It is not uncommon to find files containing credentials that can be
leveraged to access other systems or even gain entry into the Active
Directory environment.

### Home Directory Contents

        [!bash!]$ ls /home

    backupsvc  bob.jones  cliff.moore  logger  mrb3n  shared  stacey.jenkins

      

We can check individual user directories and check to see if files such
as the `.bash_history` file are readable and contain any interesting
commands, look for configuration files, and check to see if we can
obtain copies of a user\'s SSH keys.

### User\'s Home Directory Contents

        [!bash!]$ ls -la /home/stacey.jenkins/

    total 32
    drwxr-xr-x 3 stacey.jenkins stacey.jenkins 4096 Aug 30 23:37 .
    drwxr-xr-x 9 root           root           4096 Aug 30 23:33 ..
    -rw------- 1 stacey.jenkins stacey.jenkins   41 Aug 30 23:35 .bash_history
    -rw-r--r-- 1 stacey.jenkins stacey.jenkins  220 Sep  1  2015 .bash_logout
    -rw-r--r-- 1 stacey.jenkins stacey.jenkins 3771 Sep  1  2015 .bashrc
    -rw-r--r-- 1 stacey.jenkins stacey.jenkins   97 Aug 30 23:37 config.json
    -rw-r--r-- 1 stacey.jenkins stacey.jenkins  655 May 16  2017 .profile
    drwx------ 2 stacey.jenkins stacey.jenkins 4096 Aug 30 23:35 .ssh

      

If you find an SSH key for your current user, this could be used to open
an SSH session on the host (if SSH is exposed externally) and gain a
stable and fully interactive session. SSH keys could be leveraged to
access other systems within the network as well. At the minimum, check
the ARP cache to see what other hosts are being accessed and
cross-reference these against any useable SSH private keys.

### SSH Directory Contents

        [!bash!]$ ls -l ~/.ssh

    total 8
    -rw------- 1 mrb3n mrb3n 1679 Aug 30 23:37 id_rsa
    -rw-r--r-- 1 mrb3n mrb3n  393 Aug 30 23:37 id_rsa.pub

      

It is also important to check a user\'s bash history, as they may be
passing passwords as an argument on the command line, working with git
repositories, setting up cron jobs, and more. Reviewing what the user
has been doing can give you considerable insight into the type of server
you land on and give a hint as to privilege escalation paths.

### Bash History

        [!bash!]$ history

        1  id
        2  cd /home/cliff.moore
        3  exit
        4  touch backup.sh
        5  tail /var/log/apache2/error.log
        6  ssh 
          [emailÂ protected]
          7  history

        
      

`Sudo Privileges`: Can the user run any commands either as another user
or as root? If you do not have credentials for the user, it may not be
possible to leverage sudo permissions. However, often sudoer entries
include `NOPASSWD`, meaning that the user can run the specified command
without being prompted for a password. Not all commands, even we can run
as root, will lead to privilege escalation. It is not uncommon to gain
access as a user with full sudo privileges, meaning they can run any
command as root. Issuing a simple `sudo su` command will immediately
give you a root session.

### Sudo - List User\'s Privileges

        [!bash!]$ sudo -l

    Matching Defaults entries for sysadm on NIX02:
        env_reset, mail_badpass, secure_path=/usr/local/sbin\:/usr/local/bin\:/usr/sbin\:/usr/bin\:/sbin\:/bin\:/snap/bin

    User sysadm may run the following commands on NIX02:
        (root) NOPASSWD: /usr/sbin/tcpdump

      

`Configuration Files`: Configuration files can hold a wealth of
information. It is worth searching through all files that end in
extensions such as `.conf` and `.config`, for usernames, passwords, and
other secrets.

`Readable Shadow File`: If the shadow file is readable, you will be able
to gather password hashes for all users who have a password set. While
this does not guarantee further access, these hashes can be subjected to
an offline brute-force attack to recover the cleartext password.

`Password Hashes in /etc/passwd`: Occasionally, you will see password
hashes directly in the /etc/passwd file. This file is readable by all
users, and as with hashes in the `shadow` file, these can be subjected
to an offline password cracking attack. This configuration, while not
common, can sometimes be seen on embedded devices and routers.

### Passwd

        [!bash!]$ cat /etc/passwd

    root:x:0:0:root:/root:/bin/bash
    daemon:x:1:1:daemon:/usr/sbin:/usr/sbin/nologin
    bin:x:2:2:bin:/bin:/usr/sbin/nologin
    sys:x:3:3:sys:/dev:/usr/sbin/nologin
    sync:x:4:65534:sync:/bin:/bin/sync
    games:x:5:60:games:/usr/games:/usr/sbin/nologin
    man:x:6:12:man:/var/cache/man:/usr/sbin/nologin
    lp:x:7:7:lp:/var/spool/lpd:/usr/sbin/nologin
    mail:x:8:8:mail:/var/mail:/usr/sbin/nologin
    news:x:9:9:news:/var/spool/news:/usr/sbin/nologin
    <...SNIP...>
    dnsmasq:x:109:65534:dnsmasq,,,:/var/lib/misc:/bin/false
    sshd:x:110:65534::/var/run/sshd:/usr/sbin/nologin
    mrb3n:x:1000:1000:mrb3n,,,:/home/mrb3n:/bin/bash
    colord:x:111:118:colord colour management daemon,,,:/var/lib/colord:/bin/false
    backupsvc:x:1001:1001::/home/backupsvc:
    bob.jones:x:1002:1002::/home/bob.jones:
    cliff.moore:x:1003:1003::/home/cliff.moore:
    logger:x:1004:1004::/home/logger:
    shared:x:1005:1005::/home/shared:
    stacey.jenkins:x:1006:1006::/home/stacey.jenkins:
    sysadm:$6$vdH7vuQIv6anIBWg$Ysk.UZzI7WxYUBYt8WRIWF0EzWlksOElDE0HLYinee38QI1A.0HW7WZCrUhZ9wwDz13bPpkTjNuRoUGYhwFE11:1007:1007::/home/sysadm:

      

`Cron Jobs`: Cron jobs on Linux systems are similar to Windows scheduled
tasks. They are often set up to perform maintenance and backup tasks. In
conjunction with other misconfigurations such as relative paths or weak
permissions, they can leverage to escalate privileges when the scheduled
cron job runs.

### Cron Jobs

        [!bash!]$ ls -la /etc/cron.daily/

    total 60
    drwxr-xr-x  2 root root 4096 Aug 30 23:49 .
    drwxr-xr-x 93 root root 4096 Aug 30 23:47 ..
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root  376 Mar 31  2016 apport
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root 1474 Sep 26  2017 apt-compat
    -rwx--x--x  1 root root  379 Aug 30 23:49 backup
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root  355 May 22  2012 bsdmainutils
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root 1597 Nov 27  2015 dpkg
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root  372 May  6  2015 logrotate
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root 1293 Nov  6  2015 man-db
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root  539 Jul 16  2014 mdadm
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root  435 Nov 18  2014 mlocate
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root  249 Nov 12  2015 passwd
    -rw-r--r--  1 root root  102 Apr  5  2016 .placeholder
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root 3449 Feb 26  2016 popularity-contest
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root  214 May 24  2016 update-notifier-common

      

`Unmounted File Systems and Additional Drives`: If you discover and can
mount an additional drive or unmounted file system, you may find
sensitive files, passwords, or backups that can be leveraged to escalate
privileges.

### File Systems & Additional Drives

        [!bash!]$ lsblk

    NAME   MAJ:MIN RM  SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINT
    sda      8:0    0   30G  0 disk 
    ââsda1   8:1    0   29G  0 part /
    ââsda2   8:2    0    1K  0 part 
    ââsda5   8:5    0  975M  0 part [SWAP]
    sr0     11:0    1  848M  0 rom  

      

`SETUID and SETGID Permissions`: Binaries are set with these permissions
to allow a user to run a command as root, without having to grant
root-level access to the user. Many binaries contain functionality that
can be exploited to get a root shell.

`Writeable Directories`: It is important to discover which directories
are writeable if you need to download tools to the system. You may
discover a writeable directory where a cron job places files, which
provides an idea of how often the cron job runs and could be used to
elevate privileges if the script that the cron job runs is also
writeable.

### Find Writable Directories

        [!bash!]$ find / -path /proc -prune -o -type d -perm -o+w 2>/dev/null

    /dmz-backups
    /tmp
    /tmp/VMwareDnD
    /tmp/.XIM-unix
    /tmp/.Test-unix
    /tmp/.X11-unix
    /tmp/systemd-private-8a2c51fcbad240d09578916b47b0bb17-systemd-timesyncd.service-TIecv0/tmp
    /tmp/.font-unix
    /tmp/.ICE-unix
    /proc
    /dev/mqueue
    /dev/shm
    /var/tmp
    /var/tmp/systemd-private-8a2c51fcbad240d09578916b47b0bb17-systemd-timesyncd.service-hm6Qdl/tmp
    /var/crash
    /run/lock

      

`Writeable Files`: Are any scripts or configuration files
world-writable? While altering configuration files can be extremely
destructive, there may be instances where a minor modification can open
up further access. Also, any scripts that are run as root using cron
jobs can be modified slightly to append a command.

### Find Writable Files

        [!bash!]$ find / -path /proc -prune -o -type f -perm -o+w 2>/dev/null

    /etc/cron.daily/backup
    /dmz-backups/backup.sh
    /proc
    /sys/fs/cgroup/memory/init.scope/cgroup.event_control



    /home/backupsvc/backup.sh



      

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Moving on

As we have seen, there are various manual enumeration techniques that we
can perform to gain information to inform various privilege escalation
attacks. A variety of techniques exist that can be leveraged to perform
local privilege escalation on Linux, which we will cover in the next
sections.

# Environment Enumeration

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Enumeration is the key to privilege escalation. Several helper scripts
(such as
[LinPEAS](https://github.com/carlospolop/PEASS-ng/tree/master/linPEAS)
and [LinEnum](https://github.com/rebootuser/LinEnum) exist to assist
with enumeration. Still, it is also important to understand what pieces
of information to look for and to be able to perform your enumeration
manually. When you gain initial shell access to the host, it is
important to check several key details.

`OS Version`: Knowing the distribution (Ubuntu, Debian, FreeBSD, Fedora,
SUSE, Red Hat, CentOS, etc.) will give you an idea of the types of tools
that may be available. This would also identify the operating system
version, for which there may be public exploits available.

`Kernel Version`: As with the OS version, there may be public exploits
that target a vulnerability in a specific kernel version. Kernel
exploits can cause system instability or even a complete crash. Be
careful running these against any production system, and make sure you
fully understand the exploit and possible ramifications before running
one.

`Running Services`: Knowing what services are running on the host is
important, especially those running as root. A misconfigured or
vulnerable service running as root can be an easy win for privilege
escalation. Flaws have been discovered in many common services such as
Nagios, Exim, Samba, ProFTPd, etc. Public exploit PoCs exist for many of
them, such as CVE-2016-9566, a local privilege escalation flaw in Nagios
Core \< 4.2.4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Gaining Situational Awareness

Let\'s say we have just gained access to a Linux host by exploiting an
unrestricted file upload vulnerability during an External Penetration
Test. After establishing our reverse shell (and ideally some sort of
persistence), we should start by gathering some basics about the system
we are working with.

First, we\'ll answer the fundamental question: What operating system are
we dealing with? If we landed on a CentOS host or Red Hat Enterprise
Linux host, our enumeration would likely be slightly different than if
we landed on a Debian-based host such as Ubuntu. If we land on a host
such as FreeBSD, Solaris, or something more obscure such as the HP
proprietary OS HP-UX or the IBM OS AIX, the commands we would work with
will likely be different. Though the commands may be different, and we
may even need to look up a command reference in some instances, the
principles are the same. For our purposes, we\'ll begin with an Ubuntu
target to cover general tactics and techniques. Once we learn the basics
and combine them with a new way of thinking and the stages of the
Penetration Testing Process, it shouldn\'t matter what type of Linux
system we land on because we\'ll have a thorough and repeatable process.

There are many cheat sheets out there to help with enumerating Linux
systems and some bits of information we are interested in will have two
or more ways to obtain it. In this module we\'ll cover one methodology
that can likely be used for the majority of Linux systems that we
encounter in the wild. That being said, make sure you understand what
the commands are doing and how to tweak them or find the information you
need a different way if a particular command doesn\'t work. Challenge
yourself during this module to try things various ways to practice your
methodology and what works best for you. Anyone can re-type commands
from a cheat sheet but a deep understanding of what you are looking for
and how to obtain it will help us be successful in any environment.

Typically we\'ll want to run a few basic commands to orient ourselves:

-   `whoami` - what user are we running as
-   `id` - what groups does our user belong to?
-   `hostname` - what is the server named. can we gather anything from
    the naming convention?
-   `ifconfig` or `ip -a` - what subnet did we land in, does the host
    have additional NICs in other subnets?
-   `sudo -l` - can our user run anything with sudo (as another user as
    root) without needing a password? This can sometimes be the easiest
    win and we can do something like `sudo su` and drop right into a
    root shell.

Including screenshots of the above information can be helpful in a
client report to provide evidence of a successful Remote Code Execution
(RCE) and to clearly identify the affected system. Now let\'s get into
our more detailed, step-by-step, enumeration.

We\'ll start out by checking out what operating system and version we
are dealing with.

        [!bash!]$ cat /etc/os-release

    NAME="Ubuntu"
    VERSION="20.04.4 LTS (Focal Fossa)"
    ID=ubuntu
    ID_LIKE=debian
    PRETTY_NAME="Ubuntu 20.04.4 LTS"
    VERSION_ID="20.04"
    HOME_URL="https://www.ubuntu.com/"
    SUPPORT_URL="https://help.ubuntu.com/"
    BUG_REPORT_URL="https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/"
    PRIVACY_POLICY_URL="https://www.ubuntu.com/legal/terms-and-policies/privacy-policy"
    VERSION_CODENAME=focal
    UBUNTU_CODENAME=focal

      

We can see that the target is running [Ubuntu 20.04.4 LTS (\"Focal
Fossa\")](https://releases.ubuntu.com/20.04/). For whatever version we
encounter its important to see if we\'re dealing with something
out-of-date or maintained. Ubuntu publishes its [release
cycle](https://ubuntu.com/about/release-cycle) and from this we can see
that \"Focal Fossa\" does not reach end of life until April 2030. From
this information we can assume that we will not encounter a well-known
Kernel vulnerability because the customer has been keeping their
internet-facing asset patched but we\'ll still look regardless.

Next we\'ll want to check out our current user\'s PATH, which is where
the Linux system looks every time a command is executed for any
executables to match the name of what we type, i.e., `id` which on this
system is located at `/usr/bin/id`. As we\'ll see later in this module,
if the PATH variable for a target user is misconfigured we may be able
to leverage it to escalate privileges. For now we\'ll note it down and
add it to our notetaking tool of choice.

        [!bash!]$ echo $PATH

    /usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin

      

We can also check out all environment variables that are set for our
current user, we may get lucky and find something sensitive in there
such as a password. We\'ll note this down and move on.

        [!bash!]$ env

    SHELL=/bin/bash
    PWD=/home/htb-student
    LOGNAME=htb-student
    XDG_SESSION_TYPE=tty
    MOTD_SHOWN=pam
    HOME=/home/htb-student
    LANG=en_US.UTF-8



      

Next let\'s note down the Kernel version. We can do some searches to see
if the target is running a vulnerable Kernel (which we\'ll get to take
advantage of later on in the module) which has some known public exploit
PoC. We can do this a few ways, another way would be `cat /proc/version`
but we\'ll use the `uname -a` command.

        [!bash!]$ uname -a

    Linux nixlpe02 5.4.0-122-generic #138-Ubuntu SMP Wed Jun 22 15:00:31 UTC 2022 x86_64 x86_64 x86_64 GNU/Linux

      

We can next gather some additional information about the host itself
such as the CPU type/version:

        [!bash!]$ lscpu 

    Architecture:                    x86_64
    CPU op-mode(s):                  32-bit, 64-bit
    Byte Order:                      Little Endian
    Address sizes:                   43 bits physical, 48 bits virtual
    CPU(s):                          2
    On-line CPU(s) list:             0,1
    Thread(s) per core:              1
    Core(s) per socket:              2
    Socket(s):                       1
    NUMA node(s):                    1
    Vendor ID:                       AuthenticAMD
    CPU family:                      23
    Model:                           49
    Model name:                      AMD EPYC 7302P 16-Core Processor
    Stepping:                        0
    CPU MHz:                         2994.375
    BogoMIPS:                        5988.75
    Hypervisor vendor:               VMware



      

What login shells exist on the server? Note these down and highlight
that both Tmux and Screen are availble to us.

        [!bash!]$ cat /etc/shells

    # /etc/shells: valid login shells
    /bin/sh
    /bin/bash
    /usr/bin/bash
    /bin/rbash
    /usr/bin/rbash
    /bin/dash
    /usr/bin/dash
    /usr/bin/tmux
    /usr/bin/screen

      

We should also check to see if any defenses are in place and we can
enumerate any information about them. Some things to look for include:

-   [Exec Shield](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exec_Shield)
-   [iptables](https://linux.die.net/man/8/iptables)
-   [AppArmor](https://apparmor.net/)
-   [SELinux](https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/linux/what-is-selinux)
-   [Fail2ban](https://github.com/fail2ban/fail2ban)
-   [Snort](https://www.snort.org/faq/what-is-snort)
-   [Uncomplicated Firewall
    (ufw)](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/UncomplicatedFirewall)

Often we will not have the privileges to enumerate the configurations of
these protections but knowing what, if any, are in place, can help us
not to waste time on certain tasks.

Next we can take a look at the drives and any shares on the system.
First, we can use the `lsblk` command to enumerate information about
block devices on the system (hard disks, USB drives, optical drives,
etc.). If we discover and can mount an additional drive or unmounted
file system, we may find sensitive files, passwords, or backups that can
be leveraged to escalate privileges.

        [!bash!]$ lsblk

    NAME                      MAJ:MIN RM  SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINT
    loop0                       7:0    0   55M  1 loop /snap/core18/1705
    loop1                       7:1    0   69M  1 loop /snap/lxd/14804
    loop2                       7:2    0   47M  1 loop /snap/snapd/16292
    loop3                       7:3    0  103M  1 loop /snap/lxd/23339
    loop4                       7:4    0   62M  1 loop /snap/core20/1587
    loop5                       7:5    0 55.6M  1 loop /snap/core18/2538
    sda                         8:0    0   20G  0 disk 
    ââsda1                      8:1    0    1M  0 part 
    ââsda2                      8:2    0    1G  0 part /boot
    ââsda3                      8:3    0   19G  0 part 
      ââubuntu--vg-ubuntu--lv 253:0    0   18G  0 lvm  /
    sr0                        11:0    1  908M  0 rom 

      

The command `lpstat` can be used to find information about any printers
attached to the system. If there are active or queued print jobs can we
gain access to some sort of sensitive information?

We should also checked for mounted drives and unmounted drives. Can we
mount an umounted drive and gain access to sensitive data? Can we find
any types of credentials in `fstab` for mounted drives by grepping for
common words such as password, username, credential, etc in
`/etc/fstab`?

        [!bash!]$ cat /etc/fstab

    # /etc/fstab: static file system information.
    #
    # Use 'blkid' to print the universally unique identifier for a
    # device; this may be used with UUID= as a more robust way to name devices
    # that works even if disks are added and removed. See fstab(5).
    #
    #                
    # / was on /dev/ubuntu-vg/ubuntu-lv during curtin installation
    /dev/disk/by-id/dm-uuid-LVM-BdLsBLE4CvzJUgtkugkof4S0dZG7gWR8HCNOlRdLWoXVOba2tYUMzHfFQAP9ajul / ext4 defaults 0 0
    # /boot was on /dev/sda2 during curtin installation
    /dev/disk/by-uuid/20b1770d-a233-4780-900e-7c99bc974346 /boot ext4 defaults 0 0

      

Check out the routing table by typing `route` or `netstat -rn`. Here we
can see what other networks are available via which interface.

        [!bash!]$ route

    Kernel IP routing table
    Destination     Gateway         Genmask         Flags Metric Ref    Use Iface
    default         _gateway        0.0.0.0         UG    0      0        0 ens192
    10.129.0.0      0.0.0.0         255.255.0.0     U     0      0        0 ens192

      

In a domain environment we\'ll definitely want to check
`/etc/resolv.conf` if the host is configured to use internal DNS we may
be able to use this as a starting point to query the Active Directory
environment.

We\'ll also want to check the arp table to see what other hosts the
target has been communicating with.

        [!bash!]$ arp -a

    _gateway (10.129.0.1) at 00:50:56:b9:b9:fc [ether] on ens192

      

The environment enumeration also includes knowledge about the users that
exist on the target system. This is because individual users are often
configured during the installation of applications and services to limit
the service\'s privileges. The reason for this is to maintain the
security of the system itself. Because if a service is running with the
highest privileges ( `root`) and this is brought under control by an
attacker, the attacker automatically has the highest rights over the
entire system. All users on the system are stored in the `/etc/passwd`
file. The format gives us some information, such as:

1.  Username
2.  Password
3.  User ID (UID)
4.  Group ID (GID)
5.  User ID info
6.  Home directory
7.  Shell

### Existing Users

        [!bash!]$ cat /etc/passwd

    root:x:0:0:root:/root:/bin/bash
    daemon:x:1:1:daemon:/usr/sbin:/usr/sbin/nologin
    bin:x:2:2:bin:/bin:/usr/sbin/nologin
    sys:x:3:3:sys:/dev:/usr/sbin/nologin
    sync:x:4:65534:sync:/bin:/bin/sync
    games:x:5:60:games:/usr/games:/usr/sbin/nologin
    man:x:6:12:man:/var/cache/man:/usr/sbin/nologin
    lp:x:7:7:lp:/var/spool/lpd:/usr/sbin/nologin
    mail:x:8:8:mail:/var/mail:/usr/sbin/nologin
    news:x:9:9:news:/var/spool/news:/usr/sbin/nologin
    uucp:x:10:10:uucp:/var/spool/uucp:/usr/sbin/nologin
    proxy:x:13:13:proxy:/bin:/usr/sbin/nologin
    www-data:x:33:33:www-data:/var/www:/usr/sbin/nologin
    backup:x:34:34:backup:/var/backups:/usr/sbin/nologin
    list:x:38:38:Mailing List Manager:/var/list:/usr/sbin/nologin
    irc:x:39:39:ircd:/var/run/ircd:/usr/sbin/nologin
    tcpdump:x:108:115::/nonexistent:/usr/sbin/nologin
    mrb3n:x:1000:1000:mrb3n:/home/mrb3n:/bin/bash
    bjones:x:1001:1001::/home/bjones:/bin/sh
    administrator.ilfreight:x:1002:1002::/home/administrator.ilfreight:/bin/sh
    backupsvc:x:1003:1003::/home/backupsvc:/bin/sh
    cliff.moore:x:1004:1004::/home/cliff.moore:/bin/bash
    logger:x:1005:1005::/home/logger:/bin/sh
    shared:x:1006:1006::/home/shared:/bin/sh
    stacey.jenkins:x:1007:1007::/home/stacey.jenkins:/bin/bash
    htb-student:x:1008:1008::/home/htb-student:/bin/bash


      

Occasionally, we will see password hashes directly in the `/etc/passwd`
file. This file is readable by all users, and as with hashes in the
`/etc/shadow` file, these can be subjected to an offline password
cracking attack. This configuration, while not common, can sometimes be
seen on embedded devices and routers.

        [!bash!]$ cat /etc/passwd | cut -f1 -d:

    root
    daemon
    bin
    sys

    ...SNIP...

    mrb3n
    lxd
    bjones
    administrator.ilfreight
    backupsvc
    cliff.moore
    logger
    shared
    stacey.jenkins
    htb-student

      

With Linux, several different hash algorithms can be used to make the
passwords unrecognizable. Identifying them from the first hash blocks
can help us to use and work with them later if needed. Here is a list of
the most used ones:

  **Algorithm**   **Hash**
  --------------- -----------------
  Salted MD5      `$1$`\...
  SHA-256         `$5$`\...
  SHA-512         `$6$`\...
  BCrypt          `$2a$`\...
  Scrypt          `$7$`\...
  Argon2          `$argon2i$`\...

We\'ll also want to check which users have login shells. Once we see
what shells are on the system, we can check each version for
vulnerabilities. Because outdated versions, such as Bash version 4.1,
are vulnerable to a `shellshock` exploit.

        [!bash!]$ grep "*sh$" /etc/passwd

    root:x:0:0:root:/root:/bin/bash
    mrb3n:x:1000:1000:mrb3n:/home/mrb3n:/bin/bash
    bjones:x:1001:1001::/home/bjones:/bin/sh
    administrator.ilfreight:x:1002:1002::/home/administrator.ilfreight:/bin/sh
    backupsvc:x:1003:1003::/home/backupsvc:/bin/sh
    cliff.moore:x:1004:1004::/home/cliff.moore:/bin/bash
    logger:x:1005:1005::/home/logger:/bin/sh
    shared:x:1006:1006::/home/shared:/bin/sh
    stacey.jenkins:x:1007:1007::/home/stacey.jenkins:/bin/bash
    htb-student:x:1008:1008::/home/htb-student:/bin/bash

      

Each user in Linux systems is assigned to a specific group or groups and
thus receives special privileges. For example, if we have a folder named
`dev` only for developers, a user must be assigned to the appropriate
group to access that folder. The information about the available groups
can be found in the `/etc/group` file, which shows us both the group
name and the assigned user names.

### Existing Groups

        [!bash!]$ cat /etc/group

    root:x:0:
    daemon:x:1:
    bin:x:2:
    sys:x:3:
    adm:x:4:syslog,htb-student
    tty:x:5:syslog
    disk:x:6:
    lp:x:7:
    mail:x:8:
    news:x:9:
    uucp:x:10:
    man:x:12:
    proxy:x:13:
    kmem:x:15:
    dialout:x:20:
    fax:x:21:
    voice:x:22:
    cdrom:x:24:htb-student
    floppy:x:25:
    tape:x:26:
    sudo:x:27:mrb3n,htb-student
    audio:x:29:pulse
    dip:x:30:htb-student
    www-data:x:33:
    ...SNIP...

      

The `/etc/group` file lists all of the groups on the system. We can then
use the [getent](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/getent.1.html)
command to list members of any interesting groups.

        [!bash!]$ getent group sudo

    sudo:x:27:mrb3n

      

We can also check out which users have a folder under the `/home`
directory. We\'ll want to enumerate each of these to see if any of the
system users are storing any sensitive data, files containing passwords.
We should check to see if files such as the `.bash_history` file are
readable and contain any interesting commands and look for configuration
files. It is not uncommon to find files containing credentials that can
be leveraged to access other systems or even gain entry into the Active
Directory environment. Its also important to check for SSH keys for all
users, as these could be used to achieve persistence on the system,
potentially to escalate privileges, or to assist with pivoting and port
forwarding further into the internal network. At the minimum, check the
ARP cache to see what other hosts are being accessed and cross-reference
these against any useable SSH private keys.

        [!bash!]$ ls /home

    administrator.ilfreight  bjones       htb-student  mrb3n   stacey.jenkins
    backupsvc                cliff.moore  logger       shared

      

Finally, we can search for any \"low hanging fruit\" such as config
files, and other files that may contain sensitive information.
Configuration files can hold a wealth of information. It is worth
searching through all files that end in extensions such as .conf and
.config, for usernames, passwords, and other secrets.

If we\'ve gathered any passwords we should try them at this time for all
users present on the system. Password re-use is common so we might get
lucky!

In Linux, there are many different places where such files can be
stored, including mounted file systems. A mounted file system is a file
system that is attached to a particular directory on the system and
accessed through that directory. Many file systems, such as ext4, NTFS,
and FAT32, can be mounted. Each type of file system has its own benefits
and drawbacks. For example, some file systems can only be read by the
operating system, while others can be read and written by the user. File
systems that can be read and written to by the user are called
read/write file systems. Mounting a file system allows the user to
access the files and folders stored on that file system. In order to
mount a file system, the user must have root privileges. Once a file
system is mounted, it can be unmounted by the user with root privileges.
We may have access to such file systems and may find sensitive
information, documentation, or applications there.

### Mounted File Systems

        [!bash!]$ df -h

    Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
    udev            1,9G     0  1,9G   0% /dev
    tmpfs           389M  1,8M  388M   1% /run
    /dev/sda5        20G  7,9G   11G  44% /
    tmpfs           1,9G     0  1,9G   0% /dev/shm
    tmpfs           5,0M  4,0K  5,0M   1% /run/lock
    tmpfs           1,9G     0  1,9G   0% /sys/fs/cgroup
    /dev/loop0      128K  128K     0 100% /snap/bare/5
    /dev/loop1       62M   62M     0 100% /snap/core20/1611
    /dev/loop2       92M   92M     0 100% /snap/gtk-common-themes/1535
    /dev/loop4       55M   55M     0 100% /snap/snap-store/558
    /dev/loop3      347M  347M     0 100% /snap/gnome-3-38-2004/115
    /dev/loop5       47M   47M     0 100% /snap/snapd/16292
    /dev/sda1       511M  4,0K  511M   1% /boot/efi
    tmpfs           389M   24K  389M   1% /run/user/1000
    /dev/sr0        3,6G  3,6G     0 100% /media/htb-student/Ubuntu 20.04.5 LTS amd64
    /dev/loop6       50M   50M     0 100% /snap/snapd/17576
    /dev/loop7       64M   64M     0 100% /snap/core20/1695
    /dev/loop8       46M   46M     0 100% /snap/snap-store/599
    /dev/loop9      347M  347M     0 100% /snap/gnome-3-38-2004/119

      

When a file system is unmounted, it is no longer accessible by the
system. This can be done for various reasons, such as when a disk is
removed, or a file system is no longer needed. Another reason may be
that files, scripts, documents, and other important information must not
be mounted and viewed by a standard user. Therefore, if we can extend
our privileges to the `root` user, we could mount and read these file
systems ourselves. Unmounted file systems can be viewed as follows:

### Unmounted File Systems

        [!bash!]$ cat /etc/fstab | grep -v "#" | column -t

    UUID=5bf16727-fcdf-4205-906c-0620aa4a058f  /          ext4  errors=remount-ro  0  1
    UUID=BE56-AAE0                             /boot/efi  vfat  umask=0077         0  1
    /swapfile                                  none       swap  sw                 0  0

      

Many folders and files are kept hidden on a Linux system so they are not
obvious, and accidental editing is prevented. Why such files and folders
are kept hidden, there are many more reasons than those mentioned so
far. Nevertheless, we need to be able to locate all hidden files and
folders because they can often contain sensitive information, even if we
have read-only permissions.

### All Hidden Files

        [!bash!]$ find / -type f -name ".*" -exec ls -l {} \; 2>/dev/null | grep htb-student

    -rw-r--r-- 1 htb-student htb-student 3771 Nov 27 11:16 /home/htb-student/.bashrc
    -rw-rw-r-- 1 htb-student htb-student 180 Nov 27 11:36 /home/htb-student/.wget-hsts
    -rw------- 1 htb-student htb-student 387 Nov 27 14:02 /home/htb-student/.bash_history
    -rw-r--r-- 1 htb-student htb-student 807 Nov 27 11:16 /home/htb-student/.profile
    -rw-r--r-- 1 htb-student htb-student 0 Nov 27 11:31 /home/htb-student/.sudo_as_admin_successful
    -rw-r--r-- 1 htb-student htb-student 220 Nov 27 11:16 /home/htb-student/.bash_logout
    -rw-rw-r-- 1 htb-student htb-student 162 Nov 28 13:26 /home/htb-student/.notes

      

### All Hidden Directories

        [!bash!]$ find / -type d -name ".*" -ls 2>/dev/null

       684822      4 drwx------   3 htb-student htb-student     4096 Nov 28 12:32 /home/htb-student/.gnupg
       790793      4 drwx------   2 htb-student htb-student     4096 Okt 27 11:31 /home/htb-student/.ssh
       684804      4 drwx------  10 htb-student htb-student     4096 Okt 27 11:30 /home/htb-student/.cache
       790827      4 drwxrwxr-x   8 htb-student htb-student     4096 Okt 27 11:32 /home/htb-student/CVE-2021-3156/.git
       684796      4 drwx------  10 htb-student htb-student     4096 Okt 27 11:30 /home/htb-student/.config
       655426      4 drwxr-xr-x   3 htb-student htb-student     4096 Okt 27 11:19 /home/htb-student/.local
       524808      4 drwxr-xr-x   7 gdm         gdm             4096 Okt 27 11:19 /var/lib/gdm3/.cache
       544027      4 drwxr-xr-x   7 gdm         gdm             4096 Okt 27 11:19 /var/lib/gdm3/.config
       544028      4 drwxr-xr-x   3 gdm         gdm             4096 Aug 31 08:54 /var/lib/gdm3/.local
       524938      4 drwx------   2 colord      colord          4096 Okt 27 11:19 /var/lib/colord/.cache
         1408      2 dr-xr-xr-x   1 htb-student htb-student     2048 Aug 31 09:17 /media/htb-student/Ubuntu\ 20.04.5\ LTS\ amd64/.disk
       280101      4 drwxrwxrwt   2 root        root            4096 Nov 28 12:31 /tmp/.font-unix
       262364      4 drwxrwxrwt   2 root        root            4096 Nov 28 12:32 /tmp/.ICE-unix
       262362      4 drwxrwxrwt   2 root        root            4096 Nov 28 12:32 /tmp/.X11-unix
       280103      4 drwxrwxrwt   2 root        root            4096 Nov 28 12:31 /tmp/.Test-unix
       262830      4 drwxrwxrwt   2 root        root            4096 Nov 28 12:31 /tmp/.XIM-unix
       661820      4 drwxr-xr-x   5 root        root            4096 Aug 31 08:55 /usr/lib/modules/5.15.0-46-generic/vdso/.build-id
       666709      4 drwxr-xr-x   5 root        root            4096 Okt 27 11:18 /usr/lib/modules/5.15.0-52-generic/vdso/.build-id
       657527      4 drwxr-xr-x 170 root        root            4096 Aug 31 08:55 /usr/lib/debug/.build-id

      

In addition, three default folders are intended for temporary files.
These folders are visible to all users and can be read. In addition,
temporary logs or script output can be found there. Both `/tmp` and
`/var/tmp` are used to store data temporarily. However, the key
difference is how long the data is stored in these file systems. The
data retention time for `/var/tmp` is much longer than that of the
`/tmp` directory. By default, all files and data stored in /var/tmp are
retained for up to 30 days. In /tmp, on the other hand, the data is
automatically deleted after ten days.

In addition, all temporary files stored in the `/tmp` directory are
deleted immediately when the system is restarted. Therefore, the
`/var/tmp` directory is used by programs to store data that must be kept
between reboots temporarily.

### Temporary Files

        [!bash!]$ ls -l /tmp /var/tmp /dev/shm

    /dev/shm:
    total 0

    /tmp:
    total 52
    -rw------- 1 htb-student htb-student    0 Nov 28 12:32 config-err-v8LfEU
    drwx------ 3 root        root        4096 Nov 28 12:37 snap.snap-store
    drwx------ 2 htb-student htb-student 4096 Nov 28 12:32 ssh-OKlLKjlc98xh

    drwx------ 2 htb-student htb-student 4096 Nov 28 12:37 tracker-extract-files.1000
    drwx------ 2 gdm         gdm         4096 Nov 28 12:31 tracker-extract-files.125

    /var/tmp:
    total 28
    drwx------ 3 root root 4096 Nov 28 12:31 systemd-private-7b455e62ec09484b87eff41023c4ca53-colord.service-RrPcyi
    drwx------ 3 root root 4096 Nov 28 12:31 systemd-private-7b455e62ec09484b87eff41023c4ca53-ModemManager.service-4Rej9e
    ...SNIP...

      

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Moving On

We\'ve gotten an initial lay of the land and (hopefully) some sensitive
or useful data points that can help us on our way to escalating
privileges or even moving laterally in the internal network. Next we\'ll
turn our focus to permissions and check to see what directories,
scripts, binaries, etc we can read and write to with our current user
privileges.

Though we are focusing on manual enumeration in this module, its worth
running the
[linPEAS](https://github.com/carlospolop/PEASS-ng/tree/master/linPEAS)
script at this point in a real-world assessment so we have as much data
to dig through as possible. Oftentimes we can find an easy win but
having this output handy can sometimes uncover nuanced issues that our
manual enumeration missed. We should, though, practice our manual
enumeration as much as possible and create (and continue to add to) our
own cheat sheet of key commands (and alternatives for different Linux
operating systems). We\'ll start to develop our own style, command
preference, and even see some areas that we can begin to script out
ourselves. Tools are great and have their place but where many fall
short is being able to perform a given task when a tool fails or we
cannot get it onto the system.

VPN Servers

[Warning:]{.color-white .ml-1} Each time you \"Switch\", your connection
keys are regenerated and you must re-download your VPN connection file.

All VM instances associated with the old VPN Server will be terminated
when switching to a new VPN server.\
Existing PwnBox instances will automatically switch to the new VPN
server.

[Switching VPN\...]{.sr-only}

Select Vpn Server eu-academy-1 eu-academy-2 us-academy-1 us-academy-2
us-academy-3

PROTOCOL

UDP 1337

TCP 443

DOWNLOAD VPN CONNECTION FILE

#  {#section .text-center style="margin-top: 270px;"}

Instance is starting\...

#  {#section-1 .text-center style="margin-top: 270px;"}

Terminating instance\...


Start Instance

[ ]{.text-success .spawnsLeft} / 1 spawns left


Â Full Screen

Â Terminate

Â Reset

Life Left: []{.lifeLeft}m

Waiting to start\...

### Questions {#questions .card-title .mt-0 .font-size-medium}

Answer the question(s) below to complete this Section and earn cubes!

Target: [ [ [Click here to spawn the target system!]{.spawnTargetBtn}
]{.target style="cursor:pointer;"} ]{.text-success} \
[ Life Left: [0]{.targetLifeTime .font-size-15} minutes
]{.targetLifeTimeContainer style="display: none;"}

<div>

</div>

Cheat Sheet

[](https://academy.hackthebox.com/vpn/key){.btn .btn-light
.bg-color-blue-nav .mt-2 .d-flex .align-items-center toggle="tooltip"
data-title="Key is already installed in \"My Workstation\""}

<div>

</div>

Download VPN Connection File

<div>

<div>

SSH to []{.targetIp .text-dark} with user \"
[htb-student]{.text-success}\" and password \"
[HTB\_@cademy_stdnt!]{.text-danger}\"

[+ 0 ]{.badge .badge-soft-dark .font-size-14 .mr-2} Enumerate the Linux
environment and look for interesting files that might contain sensitive
data. Submit the flag as the answer.


Submit


<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

# Linux Services & Internals Enumeration

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now that we\'ve dug into the environment and gotten the lay of the land
and uncovered as much as possible about our user and group permissions
as they relate to files, scripts, binaries, directories, etc., we\'ll
take things one step further and look deeper into the internals of the
host operating system. In this phase we will enumerate the following
which will help to inform many of the attacks discussed in the later
sections of this module.

-   What services and applications are installed?

-   What services are running?

-   What sockets are in use?

-   What users, admins, and groups exist on the system?

-   Who is current logged in? What users recently logged in?

-   What password policies, if any, are enforced on the host?

-   Is the host joined to an Active Directory domain?

-   What types of interesting information can we find in history, log,
    and backup files

-   Which files have been modified recently and how often? Are there any
    interesting patterns in file modification that could indicate a cron
    job in use that we may be able to hijack?

-   Current IP addressing information

-   Anything interesting in the `/etc/hosts` file?

-   Are there any interesting network connections to other systems in
    the internal network or even outside the network?

-   What tools are installed on the system that we may be able to take
    advantage of? (Netcat, Perl, Python, Ruby, Nmap, tcpdump, gcc, etc.)

-   Can we access the `bash_history` file for any users and can we
    uncover any thing interesting from their recorded command line
    history such as passwords?

-   Are any Cron jobs running on the system that we may be able to
    hijack?

At this time we\'ll also want to gather as much network information as
possible. What is our current IP address? Does the system have any other
interfaces and, hence, could possibly be used to pivot into another
subnet that was previously unreachable from our attack host? We do this
with the `ip a` command or `ifconfig`, but this command will sometimes
not work on certain systems if the
[net-tools](https://packages.ubuntu.com/search?keywords=net-tools)
package is not present.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Internals

When we talk about the `internals`, we mean the internal configuration
and way of working, including integrated processes designed to
accomplish specific tasks. So we start with the interfaces through which
our target system can communicate.

### Network Interfaces

        [!bash!]$ ip a

    1: lo:  mtu 65536 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
        link/loopback 00:00:00:00:00:00 brd 00:00:00:00:00:00
        inet 127.0.0.1/8 scope host lo
           valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
        inet6 ::1/128 scope host 
           valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    2: ens192:  mtu 1500 qdisc mq state UP group default qlen 1000
        link/ether 00:50:56:b9:ed:2a brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
        inet 10.129.203.168/16 brd 10.129.255.255 scope global dynamic ens192
           valid_lft 3092sec preferred_lft 3092sec
        inet6 dead:beef::250:56ff:feb9:ed2a/64 scope global dynamic mngtmpaddr 
           valid_lft 86400sec preferred_lft 14400sec
        inet6 fe80::250:56ff:feb9:ed2a/64 scope link 
           valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever

      

Is there anything interesting in the `/etc/hosts` file?

### Hosts

        [!bash!]$ cat /etc/hosts

    127.0.0.1 localhost
    127.0.1.1 nixlpe02
    # The following lines are desirable for IPv6 capable hosts
    ::1     ip6-localhost ip6-loopback
    fe00::0 ip6-localnet
    ff00::0 ip6-mcastprefix
    ff02::1 ip6-allnodes
    ff02::2 ip6-allrouters

      

It can also be helpful to check out each user\'s last login time to try
to see when users typically log in to the system and how frequently.
This can give us an idea of how widely used this system is which can
open up the potential for more misconfigurations or \"messy\"
directories or command histories.

### User\'s Last Login

        [!bash!]$ lastlog

    Username         Port     From             Latest
    root                                       **Never logged in**
    daemon                                     **Never logged in**
    bin                                        **Never logged in**
    sys                                        **Never logged in**
    sync                                       **Never logged in**
    ...SNIP...
    systemd-coredump                           **Never logged in**
    mrb3n            pts/1    10.10.14.15      Tue Aug  2 19:33:16 +0000 2022
    lxd                                        **Never logged in**
    bjones                                     **Never logged in**
    administrator.ilfreight                           **Never logged in**
    backupsvc                                  **Never logged in**
    cliff.moore      pts/0    127.0.0.1        Tue Aug  2 19:32:29 +0000 2022
    logger                                     **Never logged in**
    shared                                     **Never logged in**
    stacey.jenkins   pts/0    10.10.14.15      Tue Aug  2 18:29:15 +0000 2022
    htb-student      pts/0    10.10.14.15      Wed Aug  3 13:37:22 +0000 2022                          

      

In addition, let\'s see if anyone else is currently on the system with
us. There are a few ways to do this, such as the `who` command. The
`finger` command will work to display this information on some Linux
systems. We can see that the `cliff.moore` user is logged in to the
system with us.

### Logged In Users

        [!bash!]$ w

     12:27:21 up 1 day, 16:55,  1 user,  load average: 0.00, 0.00, 0.00
    USER     TTY      FROM             LOGIN@   IDLE   JCPU   PCPU WHAT
    cliff.mo pts/0    10.10.14.16      Tue19   40:54m  0.02s  0.02s -bash

      

It is also important to check a user\'s bash history, as they may be
passing passwords as an argument on the command line, working with git
repositories, setting up cron jobs, and more. Reviewing what the user
has been doing can give you considerable insight into the type of server
you land on and give a hint as to privilege escalation paths.

### Command History

        [!bash!]$ history

        1  id
        2  cd /home/cliff.moore
        3  exit
        4  touch backup.sh
        5  tail /var/log/apache2/error.log
        6  ssh 
          [emailÂ protected]
          7  history

        
      

Sometimes we can also find special history files created by scripts or
programs. This can be found, among others, in scripts that monitor
certain activities of users and check for suspicious activities.

### Finding History Files

        [!bash!]$ find / -type f \( -name *_hist -o -name *_history \) -exec ls -l {} \; 2>/dev/null

    -rw------- 1 htb-student htb-student 387 Nov 27 14:02 /home/htb-student/.bash_history

      

It\'s also a good idea to check for any cron jobs on the system. Cron
jobs on Linux systems are similar to Windows scheduled tasks. They are
often set up to perform maintenance and backup tasks. In conjunction
with other misconfigurations such as relative paths or weak permissions,
they can leverage to escalate privileges when the scheduled cron job
runs.

### Cron

        [!bash!]$ ls -la /etc/cron.daily/

    total 48
    drwxr-xr-x  2 root root 4096 Aug  2 17:36 .
    drwxr-xr-x 96 root root 4096 Aug  2 19:34 ..
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root  376 Dec  4  2019 apport
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root 1478 Apr  9  2020 apt-compat
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root  355 Dec 29  2017 bsdmainutils
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root 1187 Sep  5  2019 dpkg
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root  377 Jan 21  2019 logrotate
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root 1123 Feb 25  2020 man-db
    -rw-r--r--  1 root root  102 Feb 13  2020 .placeholder
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root 4574 Jul 18  2019 popularity-contest
    -rwxr-xr-x  1 root root  214 Apr  2  2020 update-notifier-common

      

The [proc filesystem](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/proc.5.html)
( `proc` / `procfs`) is a particular filesystem in Linux that contains
information about system processes, hardware, and other system
information. It is the primary way to access process information and can
be used to view and modify kernel settings. It is virtual and does not
exist as a real filesystem but is dynamically generated by the kernel.
It can be used to look up system information such as the state of
running processes, kernel parameters, system memory, and devices. It
also sets certain system parameters, such as process priority,
scheduling, and memory allocation.

### Proc

        [!bash!]$ find /proc -name cmdline -exec cat {} \; 2>/dev/null | tr " " "\n"

    ...SNIP...
    startups/usr/lib/packagekit/packagekitd/usr/lib/packagekit/packagekitd/usr/lib/packagekit/packagekitd/usr/lib/packagekit/
          [emailÂ protected]@10.129.14.200sshd:
    htb-student
    [priv]sshd:
    htb-student
    [priv]/usr/bin/ssh-agent-D-a/run/user/1000/keyring/.ssh/usr/bin/ssh-agent-D-a/run/user/1000/keyring/.sshsshd:
    htb-student@pts/2sshd:

        
      

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Services

If it is a slightly older Linux system, the likelihood increases that we
can find installed packages that may already have at least one
vulnerability. However, current versions of Linux distributions can also
have older packages or software installed that may have such
vulnerabilities. Therefore, we will see a method to help us detect
potentially dangerous packages in a bit. To do this, we first need to
create a list of installed packages to work with.

### Installed Packages

        [!bash!]$ apt list --installed | tr "/" " " | cut -d" " -f1,3 | sed 's/[0-9]://g' | tee -a installed_pkgs.list

    Listing...                                                 
    accountsservice-ubuntu-schemas 0.0.7+17.10.20170922-0ubuntu1                                                          
    accountsservice 0.6.55-0ubuntu12~20.04.5                   
    acl 2.2.53-6                                               
    acpi-support 0.143                                         
    acpid 2.0.32-1ubuntu1                                      
    adduser 3.118ubuntu2                                       
    adwaita-icon-theme 3.36.1-2ubuntu0.20.04.2                 
    alsa-base 1.0.25+dfsg-0ubuntu5                             
    alsa-topology-conf 1.2.2-1                                                                                            
    alsa-ucm-conf 1.2.2-1ubuntu0.13                            
    alsa-utils 1.2.2-1ubuntu2.1                                                                                           
    amd64-microcode 3.20191218.1ubuntu1
    anacron 2.3-29
    apg 2.2.3.dfsg.1-5
    app-install-data-partner 19.04
    apparmor 2.13.3-7ubuntu5.1
    apport-gtk 2.20.11-0ubuntu27.24
    apport-symptoms 0.23
    apport 2.20.11-0ubuntu27.24
    appstream 0.12.10-2
    apt-config-icons-hidpi 0.12.10-2
    apt-config-icons 0.12.10-2
    apt-utils 2.0.9
    ...SNIP...

      

It\'s also a good idea to check if the `sudo` version installed on the
system is vulnerable to any legacy or recent exploits.

### Sudo Version

        [!bash!]$ sudo -V

    Sudo version 1.8.31
    Sudoers policy plugin version 1.8.31
    Sudoers file grammar version 46
    Sudoers I/O plugin version 1.8.31

      

Occasionally it can also happen that no direct packages are installed on
the system but compiled programs in the form of binaries. These do not
require installation and can be executed directly by the system itself.

### Binaries

        [!bash!]$ ls -l /bin /usr/bin/ /usr/sbin/

    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root     7 Oct 27 11:14 /bin -> usr/bin

    /usr/bin/:
    total 175160
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root       31248 May 19  2020  aa-enabled
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root       35344 May 19  2020  aa-exec
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root       22912 Apr 14  2021  aconnect
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root       19016 Nov 28  2019  acpi_listen
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root        7415 Oct 26  2021  add-apt-repository
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root       30952 Feb  7  2022  addpart
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root          26 Oct 20  2021  addr2line -> x86_64-linux-gnu-addr2line
    ...SNIP...

    /usr/sbin/:
    total 32500
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root      3068 Mai 19  2020 aa-remove-unknown
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root      8839 Mai 19  2020 aa-status
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root       139 Jun 18  2019 aa-teardown
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root     14728 Feb 25  2020 accessdb
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root     60432 Nov 28  2019 acpid
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root      3075 Jul  4 18:20 addgnupghome
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root         7 Okt 27 11:14 addgroup -> adduser
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root       860 Dez  7  2019 add-shell
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root     37785 Apr 16  2020 adduser
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root     69000 Feb  7  2022 agetty
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root      5576 Jul 31  2015 alsa
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root      4136 Apr 14  2021 alsabat-test
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root    118176 Apr 14  2021 alsactl
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root     26489 Apr 14  2021 alsa-info
    -rwxr-xr-x 1 root root     39088 Jul 16  2019 anacron
    ...SNIP...

      

[GTFObins](https://gtfobins.github.io) provides an excellent platform
that includes a list of binaries that can potentially be exploited to
escalate our privileges on the target system. With the next oneliner, we
can compare the existing binaries with the ones from GTFObins to see
which binaries we should investigate later.

### GTFObins

        [!bash!]$ for i in $(curl -s https://gtfobins.github.io/ | html2text | cut -d" " -f1 | sed '/^[[:space:]]*$/d');do if grep -q "$i" installed_pkgs.list;then echo "Check GTFO for: $i";fi;done

    Check GTFO for: ab                                         
    Check GTFO for: apt                                        
    Check GTFO for: ar                                         
    Check GTFO for: as         
    Check GTFO for: ash                                        
    Check GTFO for: aspell                                     
    Check GTFO for: at     
    Check GTFO for: awk      
    Check GTFO for: bash                                       
    Check GTFO for: bridge
    Check GTFO for: busybox
    Check GTFO for: bzip2
    Check GTFO for: cat
    Check GTFO for: comm
    Check GTFO for: cp
    Check GTFO for: cpio
    Check GTFO for: cupsfilter
    Check GTFO for: curl
    Check GTFO for: dash
    Check GTFO for: date
    Check GTFO for: dd
    Check GTFO for: diff

      

We can use the diagnostic tool `strace` on Linux-based operating systems
to track and analyze system calls and signal processing. It allows us to
follow the flow of a program and understand how it accesses system
resources, processes signals, and receives and sends data from the
operating system. In addition, we can also use the tool to monitor
security-related activities and identify potential attack vectors, such
as specific requests to remote hosts using passwords or tokens.

The output of `strace` can be written to a file for later analysis, and
it provides a wealth of options that allow detailed monitoring of the
program\'s behavior.

### Trace System Calls

        [!bash!]$ strace ping -c1 10.129.112.20

    execve("/usr/bin/ping", ["ping", "-c1", "10.129.112.20"], 0x7ffdc8b96cc0 /* 80 vars */) = 0
    access("/etc/suid-debug", F_OK)         = -1 ENOENT (No such file or directory)
    brk(NULL)                               = 0x56222584c000
    arch_prctl(0x3001 /* ARCH_??? */, 0x7fffb0b2ea00) = -1 EINVAL (Invalid argument)
    ...SNIP...
    access("/etc/ld.so.preload", R_OK)      = -1 ENOENT (No such file or directory)
    ...SNIP...
    openat(AT_FDCWD, "/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libidn2.so.0", O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC) = 3
    ...SNIP...
    read(3, "\177ELF\2\1\1\3\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\0\3\0>\0\1\0\0\0P\237\2\0\0\0\0\0"..., 832) = 832
    pread64(3, "\6\0\0\0\4\0\0\0@\0\0\0\0\0\0\0@\0\0\0\0\0\0\0@\0\0\0\0\0\0\0"..., 784, 64) = 784
    pread64(3, "\4\0\0\0 \0\0\0\5\0\0\0GNU\0\2\0\0\300\4\0\0\0\3\0\0\0\0\0\0\0"..., 48, 848) = 48
    ...SNIP...
    socket(AF_INET, SOCK_DGRAM, IPPROTO_ICMP) = 3
    socket(AF_INET6, SOCK_DGRAM, IPPROTO_ICMPV6) = 4
    capget({version=_LINUX_CAPABILITY_VERSION_3, pid=0}, NULL) = 0
    capget({version=_LINUX_CAPABILITY_VERSION_3, pid=0}, {effective=0, permitted=0, inheritable=0}) = 0
    openat(AT_FDCWD, "/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/gconv/gconv-modules.cache", O_RDONLY) = 5
    ...SNIP...
    socket(AF_INET, SOCK_DGRAM, IPPROTO_IP) = 5
    connect(5, {sa_family=AF_INET, sin_port=htons(1025), sin_addr=inet_addr("10.129.112.20")}, 16) = 0
    getsockname(5, {sa_family=AF_INET, sin_port=htons(39885), sin_addr=inet_addr("10.129.112.20")}, [16]) = 0
    close(5)                                = 0
    ...SNIP...
    sendto(3, "\10\0\31\303\0\0\0\1eX\327c\0\0\0\0\330\254\n\0\0\0\0\0\20\21\22\23\24\25\26\27"..., 64, 0, {sa_family=AF_INET, sin_port=htons(0), sin_addr=inet_addr("10.129.112.20")}, 16) = 64
    ...SNIP...
    recvmsg(3, {msg_name={sa_family=AF_INET, sin_port=htons(0), sin_addr=inet_addr("10.129.112.20")}, msg_namelen=128 => 16, msg_iov=[{iov_base="\0\0!\300\0\3\0\1eX\327c\0\0\0\0\330\254\n\0\0\0\0\0\20\21\22\23\24\25\26\27"..., iov_len=192}], msg_iovlen=1, msg_control=[{cmsg_len=32, cmsg_level=SOL_SOCKET, cmsg_type=SO_TIMESTAMP_OLD, cmsg_data={tv_sec=1675057253, tv_usec=699895}}, {cmsg_len=20, cmsg_level=SOL_IP, cmsg_type=IP_TTL, cmsg_data=[64]}], msg_controllen=56, msg_flags=0}, 0) = 64
    write(1, "64 bytes from 10.129.112.20: icmp_se"..., 57) = 57
    write(1, "\n", 1)                       = 1
    write(1, "--- 10.129.112.20 ping statistics --"..., 34) = 34
    write(1, "1 packets transmitted, 1 receive"..., 60) = 60
    write(1, "rtt min/avg/max/mdev = 0.287/0.2"..., 50) = 50
    close(1)                                = 0
    close(2)                                = 0
    exit_group(0)                           = ?
    +++ exited with 0 +++

      

Users can read almost all configuration files on a Linux operating
system if the administrator has kept them the same. These configuration
files can often reveal how the service is set up and configured to
understand better how we can use it for our purposes. In addition, these
files can contain sensitive information, such as keys and paths to files
in folders that we cannot see. However, if the file has read permissions
for everyone, we can still read the file even if we do not have
permission to read the folder.

### Configuration Files

        [!bash!]$ find / -type f \( -name *.conf -o -name *.config \) -exec ls -l {} \; 2>/dev/null

    -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 448 Nov 28 12:31 /run/tmpfiles.d/static-nodes.conf
    -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 71 Nov 28 12:31 /run/NetworkManager/resolv.conf
    -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 72 Nov 28 12:31 /run/NetworkManager/no-stub-resolv.conf
    -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 0 Nov 28 12:37 /run/NetworkManager/conf.d/10-globally-managed-devices.conf
    -rw-r--r-- 1 systemd-resolve systemd-resolve 736 Nov 28 12:31 /run/systemd/resolve/stub-resolv.conf
    -rw-r--r-- 1 systemd-resolve systemd-resolve 607 Nov 28 12:31 /run/systemd/resolve/resolv.conf
    ...SNIP...

      

The scripts are similar to the configuration files. Often administrators
are lazy and convinced of network security and neglect the internal
security of their systems. These scripts, in some cases, have such wrong
privileges that we will deal with later, but the contents are of great
importance even without these privileges. Because through them, we can
discover internal and individual processes that can be of great use to
us.

### Scripts

        [!bash!]$ find / -type f -name "*.sh" 2>/dev/null | grep -v "src\|snap\|share"

    /home/htb-student/automation.sh
    /etc/wpa_supplicant/action_wpa.sh
    /etc/wpa_supplicant/ifupdown.sh
    /etc/wpa_supplicant/functions.sh
    /etc/init.d/keyboard-setup.sh
    /etc/init.d/console-setup.sh
    /etc/init.d/hwclock.sh
    ...SNIP...

      

Also, if we look at the process list, it can give us information about
which scripts or binaries are in use and by which user. So, for example,
if it is a script created by the administrator in his path and whose
rights have not been restricted, we can run it without going into the
`root` directory.

### Running Services by User

        [!bash!]$ ps aux | grep root

    ...SNIP...
    root           1  2.0  0.2 168196 11364 ?        Ss   12:31   0:01 /sbin/init splash
    root         378  0.5  0.4  62648 17212 ?        S
      

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This would give us a pretty good overview of our target system, so we
can go into more detail next and figure out the individual permissions
for the components we found.

VPN Servers

[Warning:]{.color-white .ml-1} Each time you \"Switch\", your connection
keys are regenerated and you must re-download your VPN connection file.

All VM instances associated with the old VPN Server will be terminated
when switching to a new VPN server.\
Existing PwnBox instances will automatically switch to the new VPN
server.

[Switching VPN\...]{.sr-only}

Select Vpn Server eu-academy-1 eu-academy-2 us-academy-1 us-academy-2
us-academy-3

PROTOCOL

UDP 1337

TCP 443

DOWNLOAD VPN CONNECTION FILE

#  {#section-2 .text-center style="margin-top: 270px;"}

Instance is starting\...

#  {#section-3 .text-center style="margin-top: 270px;"}

Terminating instance\...


Start Instance

[ ]{.text-success .spawnsLeft} / 1 spawns left


Â Full Screen

Â Terminate

Â Reset

Life Left: []{.lifeLeft}m

Waiting to start\...

### Questions {#questions-1 .card-title .mt-0 .font-size-medium}

Answer the question(s) below to complete this Section and earn cubes!

Target: [ [ [Click here to spawn the target system!]{.spawnTargetBtn}
]{.target style="cursor:pointer;"} ]{.text-success} \
[ Life Left: [0]{.targetLifeTime .font-size-15} minutes
]{.targetLifeTimeContainer style="display: none;"}

<div>

</div>

Cheat Sheet

[](https://academy.hackthebox.com/vpn/key){.btn .btn-light
.bg-color-blue-nav .mt-2 .d-flex .align-items-center toggle="tooltip"
data-title="Key is already installed in \"My Workstation\""}

<div>

</div>

Download VPN Connection File

<div>

<div>

SSH to []{.targetIp .text-dark} with user \"
[htb-student]{.text-success}\" and password \"
[HTB\_@cademy_stdnt!]{.text-danger}\"

[+ 0 ]{.badge .badge-soft-dark .font-size-14 .mr-2} What is the latest
Python version that is installed on the target?


Submit


<div>

</div>

</div>

</div>
